n January 7, 2017, two months after he had announced a ban on the circulation of Rs 500 and Rs 1,000 currency notes, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, addressing the national executive meeting of the BJP in Delhi, said there was a need to make political funding more transparent and that his party was in favour of electoral reforms.

This government has introduced three major changes since in the mechanics of political funding in India- political parties can now receive foreign funds; any company can donate any amount of money to any political party; and any individual, group of people or company can donate money anonymously to any party through electoral bonds.

All three provisions, it has been argued, instead of increasing transparency, have made the process even more opaque than earlier. Of course, the government has yielded to the long-standing demand of the Election Commission of India (ECI) to lower the limit for anonymous cash donations from Rs 20,000 to Rs 2,000, but this provision, its critics argue, will not change anything on the ground. "It is meaningless without a cap on the amount of money that can be collected anonymously through cash," says Lalit Panda, a research fellow at the Delhi-based Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy. Congress research cell head Rajeev Gowda agrees: "Now parties will have to show 10 times more entries of less than Rs 2,000."

However, both the Congress and the BJP have benefitted from this year's Finance Bill, which made an amendment with retrospective effect to validate any foreign funds received by any political party since 1976. In 2014, the Delhi High Court had found both the parties guilty of accepting donations from a foreign company, in breach of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA), 2010, the newer version of the now repealed FCRA, 1976. The modification of the definition of a "foreign company" rendered the verdict null and void. With the amendment, the Modi government has ensured that funds received by political parties since 1976 cannot be investigated, a stand that has made even the EC uneasy. "The EC has been of the view that no foreign funding for elections should be allowed," says Chief Election Commissioner O.P. Rawat.