A strong banking sector is important for flourishing economy. The failure of the banking
sector may have an adverse impact on other sectors. Non-performing assets are one of the
major concerns for banks in India. NPAs reflect the performance of banks. A high level
of NPAs suggests high probability of a large number of credit defaults that affect the
profitability and net-worth of banks and also erodes the value of the asset. The NPA
growth involves the necessity of provisions, which reduces the overall profits and
shareholders’ value.1
The issue of Non Performing Assets has been discussed at length for financial system all
over the world. The problem of NPAs is not only affecting the banks but also the whole
economy. In fact level of NPAs in Indian banks is nothing but a reflection of the state of
health of the industry and trade. Granting of credit for economic activities is the prime
duty of banking. Apart from raising resources through fresh deposits, borrowings and
recycling of funds received back from borrowers constitute a major part of funding credit
dispensation activity. Lending is generally encouraged because it has the effect of funds
being transferred from the system to productive purposes, which results into economic
growth. However lending also carries a risk called credit risk, which arises from the
failure of borrower. Non-recovery of loans along with interest forms a major hurdle in
the process of credit cycle. These loans affect the bank’s profitability on a large scale.2

Management of NPA is the biggest challenge faced by the Banking Industry in India.
Since Banks and Financial Institutions are the custodians of public money and there was
need to rotate the money for the public good. Non Performing Assets (NPA) is a loss to
the economy. 

Once the gross NPAs of Banking Industry crossed one lac crore mark it prompted the
government of India to come out with legislation named (SARFAESI Act), notified by
the government on 21/6/2002. Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 came into force with the object
to regulate the securitization, reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of
security interest. One of the major problems faced financial institutions/banks is that of
borrowers making wilful default, and approaching different judicial bodies for remedies.
It has become a herculean task for these institutions to collect the dues from the
borrowers. Prior to the enactment of the SARFAESI Act, 2002, the Recovery of Debts
due to Banks and Financial Institutions, 1993 was in existence and is still in force. The
1993 Act have established a special tribunal for recovery of debts due to Banks and
financial institutions without resorting to regular court, for speedy recovery of money and
disposal of cases. 

Even after establishment of a special tribunal under 1993 Act, the defaulters were
increasing and dues to be collected from borrowers were getting huge .For this ,the
Government sought to introduce a new mechanism for recovery of dues, enacting the
SARFAESI Act 2002 to collect money from the borrowers covered in this legislation
without approaching the courts. Under SARAESI Act, 2002 the secured creditor have
been empowered to take steps for recovery of their dues without the intervention of
courts or tribunals.7
There is no doubt that many Banks have succeeded in taking maximum advantage of the
SARFAESI Act in recovering their debts but still the banks and FIs are finding it difficult
to take action against their defaulting borrowers under the said Acts as hitherto the
Banks/FIs on their own and they have been groping in the dark as how to proceed under
the Act.

